Martha Contreras, marthacontreras2025@u.northwestern.edu, June 3, 2024 

Chicago is one of the cities with the largest housing crisis in the United States. An estimated 68,000 Chicagoans are experiencing homelessness, according to NBC News (February, 2024). While the majority of people below the poverty line are being pushed out of the city, forced into unsanitary or unsafe living conditions, or onto the streets, a few receive housing vouchers from the federal government distributed by the city. Where is this government money going? To billion dollar corporations, the most financially benefited in Chicago having multiple class action lawsuits alleging thousands of Department of Buildings code violations and thousands of evictions. 

The Housing Choice Voucher (HCV) Program utilizes federal funds, provided by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), to help low-income families, the elderly and people with disabilities to pay for safe, decent and clean housing (apartments, duplexes, condominiums, single-family homes and townhouses). People who find housing through the program are called “participants.” As an HCV Program participant, you pay the property owner or manager a portion of your monthly rent (based on your income) and the Chicago Housing Authority (CHA) signs a Housing Assistant Payment (HAP) contract with the property owner promising to directly pay the rest. Participant families contribute 30-40% of their income toward rent and utilities.

The HAP contract between the CHA and property owners lasts 15-30 years … unless participants are evicted. 

According to the Reader, a highly esteemed Chicago non-profit newsroom, Pangea Real Estate Holdings LLC has filed more than 9,000 eviction cases since 2009 (2019). Mice infestations, radiators not working in the middle of winter (the average December night in Chicago lowers to 22 degrees) and unanswered calls maintenance calls, accumulating debt, hundreds of eviction cases, and yet investing over $20 million to purchase dozens of apartment buildings all within 46 blocks of a South Side neighborhood. Meanwhile, “the company has claimed credit for reviving south and west side communities.”

From the fourth quarter of 2020 to the end of 2023, according to a spreadsheet of CHA information sent by the government as a FOIA request, there were a total of 364,728 HAP contracts among 16,222 property owners. Pangea Real Estate Holdings LLC was the property owner with the most HAP leases (6,485) and the highest total gross rent per owner ($7,029,293).  


Chart of the property owners ranked in descending order of amount of HAP leases.

For comparison, the total sum gross rent was roughly $501.8 million, the total average gross rent was roughly $31 thousand and the total median gross rent was roughly $12 thousand. Therefore, Pangea received 1.4% of the total money. To put that into perspective, roughly 22,723% more than the total average gross rent and roughly 58,450% more than the total median gross rent. Pangea also has nearly double the amount of total gross rent than Atlas Asset Management Corp, the second owner with the second highest amount of total gross rent (nearly $3.7 million). 

When calculating the total sum and average of HAP money sent to owners, I received highly skewed data. I then realized the “HAP to Owner” column in the 2021Q2 sheet from the excel sent by the government is illegible data. There are letters and multiple zeros before numbers with numeric values exceed far above the same address’ gross rent, which is impossible. 

After isolating the flawed data, excluding 2021Q2 from 2020Q4 to the end of 2023Q4, Pangea received roughly 1.31% of all money HAP sent to owners and roughly 21,234% more than the average owner. Here is a table of the 15 property owners with the highest total gross rent (all unskewed data):
  
  
  Given the lawsuits from Pangea to residents in impoverished Chicago neighborhoods, the corporation is disproportionately exploiting vulnerable people with inadequate housing, while receiving government housing assistance funds dedicated to helping the very families targeted.   

I am planning on further data scraping to find the neighborhoods of each address by zip code, to confirm that this private equity firm is predominantly leasing properties in lower income areas to HCV Program participants. I will also compare the prices of Pangea’s rent to other rent pricing in the area to measure the exploitation of government funds. 

The Reader already conducted an extensive investigation on this company’s “apartment empire,” but there was no information on its HAP contracts. No information on the millions of dollars in government funding dedicated to uplifting Chicago’s vulnerable communities is directly funding this corporation and indirectly contributing to the housing crisis, in the four years following the publication of this article. In order to bring the data and story to life, I will interview different plaintiffs of lawsuits filed against Pangea who were participants of the HCV Program.  

The extensiveness of this article can vary based on allotted time, but a minimum of two months would be needed (7 weeks of reporting—data gathering and interviewing; 3 weeks of writing and editing).
